You don't think that Truman then had much
knowledge about the situation? Well, if we think
back there, he inherited an awful lot of things in a
mighty short time. On a world scale in just a day.
Things going on in that particular theater at that
time were, I'm sure, not his top priorities by any
means.
So I don't really blame the Truman
administration, but all of the smoke was there and
building on up to the McCarthy-Bearer problem.
Were there particular senators or congressmen,
though, that you would place some of the blame on,
just your own personal opinion? Oh, hell yeah.
Sure, sure. There are.
I need to look at that a little more closely before I
go start naming names. Okay, fine. But, yes, there
had to be. Because you were right there on the spot,
and I was wondering what you and your men felt was
going on. Or you had just come back from China, and I
was wondering what Brigadier General would think
when he came back to America and saw what was going
on with the Nationalist Army over there. Well, it
just about killed me, I can tell you that. Because I
knew those people, and we had worked hard to move
them. When you start flying a division, 1,100,
1,200 miles, I'm putting it down.
That gets to be a really rough job, and we flew
almost half a million troops. So we're not talking
about peanuts. We're talking about a big deal.
I wish I came back here to the joint staff. I was
senior air planner on the Joint Chiefs of Staff in
Washington when I came from this job. And that's
when all that was happening over there.
So it was a little hard to tell you. How about a quote
while we rest? All right, fine. Let's have a quote.
Okay, now let's continue. On February 46, you went
back to the United States, and at that time you were
a general. about how you learned that you were
appointed a general? Yes. When I, while I was in
India, and actually in headquarters in Calcutta,
General Stratmire had recommended that I be
promoted to Brigadier General, and forwarded
this out through, you know, Stilwell Theater and
on back to Washington.
And
it seemed that things were going on all right.
But General Cure, who was Air Staff A-5 here in
Washington, which was Assistant Chief for Air
Staff Plans, passed through India.
and stopped and talked to me. Of course, planning
was one of my functions there.
And we talked at length about plans. We had worked
together in the years before that and knew each
other very well.
I told him about a plan that I was working on and my
planner was working on.
in which we really made CBI an air theater. And
about the only thing that we used ground forces for
was to guard the ports and air drones and a few
things and we carried the war by air.
And this was just a draft plan that we were working
on. But he said, how about letting me have a copy of
it? So I did. I didn't see any problem about that.
On his way back to Washington, after he finished
his other business over there, he read the plan and
he thought it had quite a bit of merit to it. So he
took it and gave it to General Handy. General Handy
was
head of the operations division of the War
Department General Staff. A really fine,
wonderful man. And General Handy liked that plan.
And
for some reason he asked General Stilwell about
some things that were contained in that plan. And
of course General Stilwell knew a damn thing So, I
got called out of bed one night about two o'clock in
the morning by General Stratt. I was living in, we
were all living in the same house in the compound.
He stood me up in my pajamas and really dressed me
down like a corporal. that
John Stilwell had called him and just absolutely
raised hell with him and told him to get his ass down
to Stilwell's headquarters down in downtown
Calcutta. So, and he, of course, didn't know a damn
thing about it, and he went down there and found out
that Stilwell
was mad because this plan had gotten back into
Washington when he didn't know anything about it.
Well, I hadn't tried to undercut anybody or
anything else. It was just that I had it in draft.
Larry wanted to see it, I let him have it, and then it
got back here. But still weren't wearing it back
here anyway until John Marshall told me to take my
name off the lip.
So something had to be done in a pretty quick hurry.
I got hold of Larry Cuter, told him what had
happened. So he went then to see John McNorney, who
was General Marshall's deputy.
And
John McNorney looked into it and got the facts one
talk with General Handy. So when the subject came
up with General Marshall, John McNorney took my
side of the cake.
John Marshall knew me too, and when all the
controversy, the chatter was over there, he just
pushed it over the side of his desk and kept on
moving. And it went on, it went on through.
If John McNarney hadn't been able to be there, know
the facts, and say what happened, or I probably
would have just been pulled from that lift. And of
course I never would have gotten back on any lift.
So you were really delighted then when you learned
that you were going to receive a star? Oh yes. I
guess
you never know the significance of a little thing.
While I was in in Cairo at the Sexton Conference.
In the planning side of the house, I had some
contact with John Handy, who was the top plan for
the War Department and for the Joint Chiefs of
Staff at that time. And I told him about some things
in India, and particularly having to do with the
Burma Road, and how we might could do a better,
better approach there. Well, he thought enough of
it that he asked General Marshall and General
Arnold to have lunch with us that day in the Manor
House and at the Pyramids in Carroll where we were.
But they did, and I laid out my plan on the table.
General Arnold said, I believe it, I think it's
right. I have fought the problem
all the way to the top twice, I've lost it, and I'm
not going to fight it anymore. We've got a plan to do
it, let's follow the plan. But General Marshall
remembered my presentation of the thing. General
Marshall A wonderful man, a really wonderful man.
I don't know when I've ever known anybody, ever
been around anyone at that time. I was so impressed
with John Marshall. Why do you say that?
He was big, really big. Thought big, acted big.
but with every ounce of compassion, integrity,
kindness, love, and patriotism that anyone could
have.
Just a wonderful man. Do you remember later on in
his life when Senator McCarthy
labeled him Either a stooge or a traitor for the
Communists? Yes, I do. What was your response?
I almost feel obligated to kill anybody that we
categorize them that way. I mean, I feel that
strongly about it. I didn't agree with what
General Marshall did in his capacity as the
peacemaker over there.
But, I didn't have the instructions that General
Marshall had when he went over there, either. To
China? Yeah. I think what General Marshall did
over there, he did pursuant to the instructions
that he had when he went there.
And as I said, with the China lobby and whatnot back
in the United States, it was during that same time
that these supplies didn't get there.
General Marshall was not soft on any communism or
anything else that was a threat to America's
freedom, and he knew damn well communism was such a
threat. He would be the last thing on his agenda, I
tell you. After the Second World War, some people,
some officers were reduced when one, or sometimes
even two, but especially one grade in the rank.
Were you concerned that you might be reduced down
to colonel? Well, yes, I was concerned, since with
one exception I was the youngest general officer
that I knew of. I think I was the youngest. How old
were you? Let's see, I guess I was 34 by that time.
So, you became a Brigadier General at age 34? 33.
That
is incredibly young. And
there was one officer, and he actually was over in
China, who was made a general up to, I think he was
28, Casey Vincent.
And he came back to the States and was reduced back
to town. So I think I was the youngest. And I knew
many others that were being reduced. You could say
one or two, two grades. And sure, I was concerned,
but what the hell, you couldn't do anything about
it anyway, except the best you could, so I just
didn't worry about it. And the job that I was given
when I got back here was a proper job for a Brigadier
General, and so the Air Force left me in that grade
and pushed me into that job. At that time when you
returned to the United States, this was a period of
heavy demobilization and a lot of people were
getting out and getting into civilian life. Did
you ever consider going, after the war, going into
civilian life? No. After I got my, after I was
accepted a regular commission in 1938, I
determined then that I was going to make a career
out of the Air Force and I just Quit worrying about
the other things. Okay, now let's turn to your job
that you held for three years, February 1946 to
June 1949, the air planner for the Joint Strategic
Plans Group for the JCS. The Joint Chiefs of Staff
had
three groups. at that time. The Joint Chiefs of
Staff were relatively new then, just hadn't
started functioning in the war.
The Joint Strategic Plans Group, the Joint
Logistics Group, and the Joint Strategic Survey
Committee. This Joint Strategic Survey
Committee was a group of Army, Navy, and Air Force
and Marine officers, very senior officers, and
they reviewed very large worldwide problems and
prepared positions for the chiefs on those. The
Joint Strategic Plans Group prepared, number
one, war plans for future use, and also plans on any
current or foreseeable situation requiring
a military position by the Joint Chiefs. One of the
first things that I started working on, as a matter
of fact was already in the mill when I got there, The
plan for the trusteeship of the Pacific Islands,
where some of the islands were strategic
trusteeships, and well it's a very large, very
large problem, a very large paper. And it was one
that I spent an awful lot of the early months
working on. Like areas like Tarawa and some of
those? Some of those were British islands too,
weren't they? Yes, some were British, some were
German, some French, all kinds.
What we did was really kind of whip them all
together, give them the closest thing, usually
give them to independence, and yet retain the kind
of entree to them that we would need to to defend
them as well as take care of our own security in the
Pacific. So they all became a part of a large
trusteeship, which we proposed we would be the
trustees. And then we... designated some of them,
particularly important ones, as strategic
trusteeships in which the right was recognized to
conduct military operations and build military
facilities and this sort of thing. Then you had to
set up a governing mechanism for that.
I'm still very proud of the whole plan, except for
one thing, And
like we do with the poor people in the United
States, anytime we want to help them, we set up a
plan that takes care of them. And as soon as you
start taking care of somebody, he becomes a ward,
and then he breeds more wards. And the first thing
you know, you're up to your ears in a welfare kind of
a situation. And we were so good to all the peoples
of the trusteeship, they have become wards, and
now they're costing us a lot of money for not much
return. I'm not happy about that aspect of it, but
everything else I am a bit happy about.
How do you think we could have resolved that
problem differently?
About there being wards, you mean? Yes. Same way
we're going to resolve it in the United States.
Situations are going to get so bad that people have
to take care of themselves or kick the damn bucket
and then they'll get busy taking care of
themselves.
I think as long as they can sit on their backside and
howl and somebody comes and brings the bucket with
some food in it, they'll howl. When the guy stops
bringing the bucket, pretty soon they'll get up
and start stirring around a little bit. In the
meantime, they'll threaten you about the
communists and threaten you about the devil and
about anything else that you think of. An honest
answer to your question, I don't know, but I think
really that is the answer. You're going to have to
make them do for themselves or starve. Same as
you're going to have to do to us. Now as the air
planner, what particular problems did you have?
During this time for these three years, it's one of
the most dynamic times in American foreign
policy, and we're going to talk about a lot of these
things that happened and what impact they had on
plans, but were there internal problems that you
faced? Internal armed services, you mean? Yes,
there were some really severe internal problems,
some that Of course, one of the big ones, I would
imagine, is the Army and the Air Force breaking
away. Yes, that was not as big as some others. What
were some of the others? That was a big one. Well,
right after the war,
I guess
it had three things that had happened that opened a
lot of people's eyes and opened a lot of new
horizons. Atomic energy had come into being, of
course. And it had come in as an air weapon, the
first application of it.
Air power had demonstrated its potential in such a
manner, it demonstrated it before, but this time
nobody could argue about it. So, everybody wanted
it. You didn't have to sell yourself anymore as an
airman.
You had to just keep from being taken over by
somebody.
The other thing,
in spite of the glory and all of the Battle of
Ladygolf and whatnot, the total effects of the
war, said to you that the surface maybe as such just
doesn't have any place left in the world
as a combat unfair
i don't i don't mean by that that you won't ever have
any more submarines or anything like this but uh
Battleships and cruisers and these kind of
things, they're fresh out. You couldn't build
them as fast as somebody could sink
them. Air Force was trying to get out from under. It
had been for a long time.
Long enough that I was already long before this one
up for court martial twice on the subject.
And so everyone in moving forward from there was
trying to put their best foot forward in terms of
having the responsibility
for air power operations of any type allocated to
their service, the Army, Navy. and of course Air
Force fighting to be a separate force and not to let
all those things be taken away.
And as far as Navy is concerned, I guess the thing
peaked in the B-36 controversy.
All of which was kind of silly. The B-36 didn't have
a hell of a lot to do with it. It was the a mighty fine
piece of equipment for what it made for, but by the
time we're talking about it here, it's already ten
years out of date. But it served as a vehicle to get
all these things all mulched up and out of focus
before the public and the Congress. And to make
some real enemies out of, between Air Force and
Navy, Naval Aviation in particular.
And so anything you did on a joint planning, as soon
as you got to the air power part of that plan, you
were going to have a hell of a fight. And you had to
fight with the Navy and you had to fight with the Air
Force. The Marines kind of acquiesced because the
Navy agreed they could keep their limited amount
of air, and that's all they wanted anyway, so they
had relative peace, but the rest of us didn't. And
so that permeated this whole three years of
fighting on the joint staff. Nuclear-wise,
of course, everybody wanted to be supreme in the
nuclear thing. The Navy wanted to drive its ships,
to drive its airplanes, to be the best in the
delivery of the weapons and everything else. and
of course the Air Force knew that that was its
destiny and it would have it. The Army couldn't be
left out. It needed its short range missiles, its
guns, which it got of course. And the big fight in
there between the Air Force and the Army was over
domination of the intercontinental And who was
going to dominate it? The Air Force won out on that
one, primarily. It doesn't mean the Army can't do
it, but they won that battle. And I think we won on
the Navy, too, because we outperformed them.
This is what made it so hard for me as the commander
of the Joint Task Force going to detonate the first
nuclear weapon at high altitude as commander of
the task force. I had to go pick an Army missile to
carry my warhead up there because the Air Force
didn't have one.
That must have caused a lot of friction. Well, it
caused an awful lot of people in the Air Force to
feel mighty hard at me. because of course the
people who had the Air Force missile were quite
confident it could get there. I had to be more than
quite confident. I had to be god damn near certain.
And the only reason the Army had one is because they
brought Bonbon and his V-2 over here and it was that
V-2 rocket that I used to put it up there.
Well we're going to get to that. I was interested in
Besides the Intercontinentals and the B-36
controversy,
what impacted the Russian atomic bomb in 1949
having the Air Force? The Russian? When Russia
exploded their atomic bomb in 1949.
Did that change the plans? That's really awfully
hard to say. No, I don't think so. It put more
urgency on some things. Remember this took
everybody by surprise. Our experts said that they
weren't going to have one until about 1960. Yes,
but we didn't all share that. Oh, you didn't? No, we
didn't. I didn't for one. I was in the, by that time,
in the atomic energy business.
John Vandenberg didn't share that view.
I think there were a number that didn't share it.
So, when they got it, it wasn't as much of a surprise
to us as a question of what is the best thing to do in
light of that fact. We didn't have a ballistic
missile that could get there. And that's when we
sat down with Bennett Shriver and said, we've got
to make some compromises and then not change our
mind. And so that gave birth to our first
intercontinental, truly intercontinental
missile that could carry a significant warhead.
And we went ahead with it. And we had it in time.
We had it before the Russians could really take
advantage of their newfound strength, even in the
sense of posing a real threat.
But Schriever did a damn good job of getting that
rocket warhead combination together and getting
it on the launch pads.
So I think that probably that was the biggest
effect I had strictly on Air Force, not on the U.S.,
but on the Air Force. Sure. And that was urgency.
Yeah. And
we, I think, were relatively well prepared to go
ahead. And nobody was well prepared with all the
reduction in funds and whatnot we'd have. Oh,
yeah. but we were prepared to go ahead. The other
thing I think it did, the other impact that it had
indirectly on the Air Force was
evident in that day in July, I believe it was, 49
when Truman said we were going ahead with the
hydrogen bomb.
At that time I was in the military liaison
committee. I was out of the joint chief.
So I wrote the draft press release that the
president turned loose that afternoon. Did you?
No kidding.
The general advisory committee to the Atomic
Energy Commission. had been meeting, well,
for several days. And they had made their
recommendations to the President through the
commission, of course.
And I was the Executive Secretary of the Military
Liaison Committee, which was a group that's
supposed to protect the interests of, or
represent, not protect, the interests of the
Department of Defense with the Atomic Energy
Commission. And the chairman of that committee
was a man named Webster, Bill Webster,
who was president of New England Power and Life.
He's the guy that put the Yankee one, Yankee two
reactors in up there later on.
And Bill was going over with the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs and Secretary of Defense
and Chairman of the Commission.
And had met with the President the day before on the
problem to present the, or to let the Chairman of
the General Advisory Committee present their
views.
And so they were going back again this time and go
over the thing with the President and he was going
to, hopefully he was going to make a decision.
So the five of them were going over to the White
House. I wrote up the draft press release on the
basis that he was going to say, yes, we are which I
thought he was, I'm going to say,
and went along with Bill over there to the White
House to the meeting. Now, I didn't go in the Oval
Office where they were meeting at that time, but I
was just outside the door. And when the President
announced his decision in there, But Bill came out
and I gave him the draft press release and the
president came to the door and read it and said,
yeah that's right, roll it. So, we went from there.
And that was a great day, I thought, because we
almost did not go ahead with that because of all
the guilty consciences, I think, that people had.
Like the General Advisory Committee. Okay, now
one of the guilty conscience, of course, was
Oppenheimer. Well, it was right there. He was one
of them. And what was your, what was your, you know,
he's a so-called father of the A-bomb. Of course,
he isn't a father, but he was one of the men
instrumental in the development of the atomic
bomb, and he was against the H-bomb. What was your
feeling toward him? Well, I guess that's probably
the hardest question that you could ask.
I got to know Oppenheimer when he was head of or
member of the General Advisory Committee and when
I was in the MLC. I got to know him a lot better than
that with the passage of time. After I left that
job, I went to defense as director of the Atomic
Energy Committee of the Research and Development
of the Department of Defense, under the Secretary
of Defense. And Appiah was chairman of that
committee, so I worked directly for him during
that period of time.
And my job, of course, to keep the damn place
running. I mean, that wasn't his occupation. He
was coming there on part-time doing these things.
Mine was to keep it, conceive the programs, get
them approved, and get them implemented, and have
the services and whatever other agencies of the
government were involved do them. So I
didn't know what I was doing.
Arthur, I believe, had the most brilliant brain of
any one that,
that I would possibly have known.
It may have been so brilliant that I don't even know
it, that I don't even know what it was thinking, you
see. I know this sounds silly, but I think it was
that way.
I think he saw in his own mind so far down the road of
history here, and he did things today that fit that
pattern a hundred years from now in his mind.
Now, I'm not sure how you do this, because I've
never tried to make my daily actions conform to
something that I think will be or ought to be 50 or
100 years from now. So I'm not sure whether it takes
a brilliant mind or not, but I would certainly
think it does. And I believe that's what he did. And
I think he did a damn good job of it.
He always did or seemed to try to do the very best for
the United States in the problem at hand, meaning
its immediate effect. Whether he was trying to do
the best for it in the long range, I have some very
serious questions in my mind.
because I think what he had in mind was a society, an
objective in mind was a society that does not now
exist. Neither ours, nor the communist, nor
socialism, or anything else.
And it was never possible for me to get a clear
enough picture of what that society was in his mind
to frame it into something I could see.
But that feeling was always there after a year's
association with him, for example.
and he was very genuine and very sincere about
everything.
Yet,
in that way of mind, there seemed to be a, an
area, naive area that either things just weren't
important to him, or that he had no thought
experience about, that he just let shine,
didn't make any difference.
In his earlier
trials and tribulations with the Atomic Energy
Commission over the clearance problem, he had no
brilliant man would do the things that he did that
caused the question on his security clearance.
And yet he never did see that it was stupid, or he
certainly never did acknowledge it. So why the
hell did he do it, you see? If I take that little
problem, it didn't turn out to be so damn little,
but relatively and translate it up here to these
bigger things, it looks still the same way, you
see. How come he thinks just this way? Because he
doesn't tell you, no more than he defended why he
did it then.
So, I really never did know. I don't know right now,
just exactly what to think. As a physicist, he was
certainly a brilliant man, no question about
that.
And if you look at what, try to put a little more
meaning into what I'm saying here, if you take his
position on the H-bomb,
I know he knew, in retrospect I know he knew, that it
was physically possible to do it. that certainly
we could get fusion and we could make it work and we
could control it.
He must have known that we couldn't sit here and not
do it and have the Russians do it and hold it over our
head. He just must have known that. He never said
that, but he must have. So, why did he take that
position? Is it because he feared retribution by
God? I don't believe so. I don't believe he
believed any of that.
So, you just end up with a bunch of damn questions
and not many answers. So, I don't know. Did you ever
have, I mean, working for him like that, did you
ever ask him straight out, why do you support your,
how do you support your position? It never, the
answer is yes, I have, a lot of times, but I'm
talking about something factual, something
immediate. And he always had a rational answer.
And sometimes I agreed with it, sometimes I
didn't, but it was at least on the basis of tangible
things that you could consider.
You ask him about these kind of long-range things
that I'm talking about, or philosophical things,
he could look right at you and talk a whole batch of
sentences and not tell you a goddamn thing and move
on to the next problem.
And without your feeling that he was trying to be
deceptive. I don't know yet whether he was or not.
He was a very complex man. How was he as far as an
administrator? No, he wasn't. He didn't profess
to be an administrator. He didn't really want to
be. How was he dealing with people? With his peers?
Okay.
I think you have to, when they ask that about that
particular man, that particular time, we have to
look at one, remember one other thing. and it
sounds maybe even unbecoming of me to mention it.
But right after the bomb went off, an atomic fusion
had been achieved by the United States, and it had
won the war in the Pacific.
The people who had worked on it, who had mastered
this And
they would do a lot of credit. It was a wonderful
job. But they had not had any praise.
And they were hungry. And they drank it in. And they
became a fraternity. And if you were a member of
that fraternity, brother, you could do no wrong.
If you were not a member of that fraternity, it
didn't make a damn what you thought. Nobody
listened. You couldn't even speak their
language. Well, it was at that point, under that
circumstances, that I entered the field, not a
member of the fraternity.
And after five
years, I guess, or six, I'll have to check it, of
working with the military side of the nuclear
business, I became the general manager of the
Atomic Energy Commission. The great scientists
are wonderful people,
and even though they are members of this exclusive
fraternity, they get hungry just like everybody
else does. They like to have three meals a day and
ride airplanes and all kinds of things. So they
need some money. The Atomic Energy Commission was
the only place they had to get any money at that
time. So they at least have to be civil to the guy who
gives them the money. So I got to know a lot of them.
some very well, and some of them very wonderful
people.
But I got to know a great deal about the motives and
egos and all the other things that make them tick.
I didn't remember all kinds of funny things about
them. One of the most wonderful people in that
fraternity is one that didn't to create such a
fraternity to be the last thing he wanted to do. And
I haven't heard from him in about a year. I don't
know whether he's still alive or not. Dr. Eugene
Wigner from Princeton.
Absolutely wonderful man. Wonderful physicist
and scientist, but also a very wonderful man. He's
the one that when they were working